---
name: swtbot-vs-window-licker
layout: post
title: SWTBot vs Window Licker
time: 2009-03-15 11:30:00 +00:00
categories: java testing
comments: true
sidebar : false
---

[{% img left http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_-uMxV_fCbC4/Sb02LJ0YQQI/AAAAAAAADDc/7ubGC1lAmMs/s200/GodzillaBot1972.png %}](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_-uMxV_fCbC4/Sb02LJ0YQQI/AAAAAAAADDc/7ubGC1lAmMs/s1600-h/GodzillaBot1972.png)

The title is a bit misleading because these guys aren't really squaring off like Gozilla and Gigan,
the projects aren't competing and this blog isn't really a full or fair comparison. For a start Window Licker doesn't yet support SWT and as its name suggests SWTBot, er, does.
  
My comments are really based on having a go at [implementing some basic SWT support](http://groups.google.com/group/windowlicker-users/browse_thread/thread/6fb792261a9cd1e7) in Window Licker and adding some
features to SWTBot so it shouldn't be taken as authoritative. This entry is
more of an experience report after trying to contribute to both projects. I'll
try to follow up with an API usage report when I've used both more with my
applications.

<!-- more -->

### The Code

  
Window Licker supports Swing and Html (including Ajax) very elegantly and uses
the Java
[java.awt.robot](http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.4.2/docs/api/java/awt/Robot.html)
package to take control of the mouse and keyboard and generate native events.
SWTBot simulates events using manual notification. That is to say it calls the
SWT widget notifyListeners method directly where as Window Licker fires native
GUI events. This wouldn't necessarily be much of a distinction but it does
mean SWTBot doesn't always behave exactly as expected (for example, it doesn't
handle text caret movement or clearing text fields). An application under test
from Window Licker behaves much more like an application driven by a user
whereas SWTBot doesn't always have to wait for visual ques to move along.

  
Window Licker feels like a more mature framework, its nicely componentised and
test driven where as SWTBot seems more evolutionary and although there are
plenty of nice abstractions in common with Window Licker, it is harder to test
due to the lack interfaces/mocks. SWTBot's code base is sprawling and covers a
lot of ground, Windows Licker feels more focused on the problem it tries to
solve. Having said that, its much more straight forward contributing to
SWTBot, I was able to contribute (and understand) more of the SWTBot code base
upfront.

  

> SWTBot's project hosting presents itself as a confused, capricious old boy,
shuffling papers and smelling mildly of pee

  
The other slight gripe I have with SWTBot is the project structure, its more
suited to Eclipse than IntelliJ as its dependencies are provided via plugins
rather than raw Jars. Window Licker comes with Eclipse and IntelliJ project
files which is always nice. SWTBot also has several projects that make up the
software, the build process isn't as obvious as others and it uses some
generated code that you'll probably won't spot but still need to know about.

  

### The Project Hosting

  
SWTBot has recently moved to its new home on [Eclipse.org](http://www.eclipse.
org/projects/project_summary.php?projectid=technology.swtbot) but the team
lead hasn't deprecated the [old site](http://swtbot.sourceforge.net/index.html) and resources.
Consequentially, it can be a bit confusing for a new user to follow when there
are two subversion repositories, two sets of bug tracking instances, lots of
mailings lists and so on. Window Licker is much more low key, at the time of
writing there is no pre-packaged release to download, it has a minimal site on
[Google Code](http://code.google.com/p/windowlicker/) that invites you to just
download the source and get stuck in! In lots of ways I prefer this approach.

  
SWTBot has lots of broken links on the site and presents itself as a confused,
capricious old boy, shuffling papers and smelling mildly of pee. Window Licker
on the other hand, portrays itself confidently, most likely wears a monocle
and speaks in a concise and authoritative tone. Even though some of what it
has too say seems to go over my head.

  

### Conclusion

  
For me, SWTBot really lets itself down is how it's being run. We all realise
that open source software often has to take a back seat to your day job but if
you're going to release something open source and encourage participation (say
by hosting it on Eclipse.org) you should really be able to take the helm and
support your community. As such, I had a bit of a bad experience with SWTBot
trying to get a feature committed. In short, I did a whole bunch of work after
explicitly being asked to do so in order to get it committed, then when it was
done, the team lead ignored it and committed a previous version I'd submitted!
The previous version works fine, it did the job but i was asked to re-jig
things to better fit in with the project's standards, yet it got dumped. See
the [Bugzilla trail](https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=259860#c28)
less I waffle even more.

  
It's a shame because experiences like that just lower confidence in a project,
I'm unlikely to want to push any changes back now. I guess though in summary,
SWTBot's code was easier to contribute to (although I was working in one small
area of a large project structure). Window Licker is probably the superior
technically and in terms of code quality but was harder (for me) to work with.
I was working on essentially cloning some of the core Licker functionality to
work with SWT and found that I didn't fully understand all the abstractions
and mechanisms. I suspect that in a pairing environment, it wouldn't be a
problem but contributing via email and patches is unlikely to get the most out
of collaboration.

  



