---
name: objectives
layout: post
title: Objectives
time: 2010-06-17 08:13:00 +01:00
categories: coaching
comments: true
---

It's objective setting time for the guys at work. Aligning what's really good for you with what's good for the company shouldn't be difficult, right? Your generally heading in the same direction and have similar interests at heart. Why then do we end up with generic meaningless objectives like "attend a XXX course"? I think you can get the most out of the objective setting exercise by thinking about what you want _personally_ out of your career, don't settle for the bland, phrase your objectives so there is real value in them. So, if the company think of them in terms of
  
> S.M.A.R.T

I like the think of them as

> S.M.A.R.T.Y
  
Where the Y is all about _YOU_; make it personal.

<!-- more -->

For example, we all want to be better developers but how do you phrase that as
an acceptable business objective that management can neatly label it, put in a
box and pull out in twelve months time to see if it's flourished? Defining
"better" in terms of SMART isn't going to be easy. How about rephrasing it and
thinking about it as reflecting on your coding practice? Keep a code journal
of good and bad coding choices, yours and your teams. Reflect on it regularly
and update entries. Was choosing a ThreadsafeDooDar here the right decision
three months on, did it ever get used in a threaded context? How about that
choice of using setter over constructor injection? How's that working out for
you? The responsibility to reflect is yours but you can get outside
perspectives from your peers.

  
{% pullquote %}
{" The key personal objective here is to keep learning, the company objective is to become a better developer "}. It can be _specific_ because your wording will
reflect something along the lines of "demonstrate a self-assessment of
personal and the team coding standard and style". It's hard to avoid the word
"quality" but if you do mention it, you should define it (not easy). The point
is there's something the company can buy into but there's something more
subtle that you can really buy into and get value from. It's all about YOU
after all.

{% endpullquote %}

  
It's measurable (at least from the companies perspective, and so can get
signed off on) because you have your journal as evidence along with dates and
conclusions. You can even emphasize a few key learning points / techniques
that you've changed your opinion on. Change is good and demonstrates learning.

  
You might be able to extend this by talking in terms of coaching. I poo poo'ed
a XXX training course earlier because I feel corporate training camps are the
worst place to learn anything (well, there are probably worse places but
there's certainly plenty of better environments). Anyway, asking for
professional and formal coaching is a great way to develop and the journal
idea can be used as evidence. The coach can co-author to give it that
"official stamp".

  
An example journal template might include date, initial description (the
approach you took), pros/cons of the initial decision (why you took the
approach), updated thoughts (including what caused you to reflect on this
specific entry), updated pros/cons, conclusion, peer comments. Try and keep an
entry specific to a single decision you made in the code (coarse or fine
grained). Getting a feel about what to journal and what not to journal should
be pretty natural, any "niggles" you get might prompt you or spotting that
you're all talking about this part of the code a lot might be a clue.

  
The real benefit though is what you can take away from it, if you talk over
your journal points with the team and keep an open mind, I'd hope it gets
filled with lots of nuggets you can add to your toolbox.

  
  

{% img http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_-uMxV_fCbC4/SVInGoVdYJI/AAAAAAAAC08/I4RV1KzCyPo/s320/gibble_22x22.png %}


